README.md, before:

# 🎓 EIT Practicum Tracking System

A full-stack web application designed to streamline practicum tracking, feedback management, and performance evaluation for students, mentors, and tutors at the Eastern Institute of Technology (EIT).

---

## 🧭 Overview

This system helps EIT’s School of Computing manage practicum activities for Mental Health & Addiction students.  
It allows students to log practicum hours, mentors to verify logs and provide feedback, and tutors to monitor overall student progress — all in one central dashboard.

---

## 🧩 Project Structure


EIT_Pratictum_Tracking_System/
├── backend/ # Node.js + Express + Prisma + MySQL + MongoDB
│ ├── prisma/ # Prisma schema & migrations
│ ├── src/
│ │ ├── routes/ # API endpoints
│ │ ├── controllers/ # Business logic
│ │ ├── middlewares/ # Auth, error handlers
│ │ └── server.js # Main Express entry point
│ └── package.json
│
├── frontend/ # React + Vite + Redux Toolkit + TailwindCSS
│ ├── src/
│ │ ├── api/ # Axios setup & interceptors
│ │ ├── components/ # Reusable UI components
│ │ ├── context/ # Auth context (Tutor / Mentor / Student)
│ │ ├── pages/ # All main pages
│ │ └── App.jsx # Root app
│ └── package.json
│
└── README.md


---

## ⚙️ Tech Stack

### Backend
- **Node.js + Express.js**
- **Prisma ORM** with **MySQL**
- **MongoDB** for log papers & feedback
- **JWT Authentication**
- **bcrypt** for password hashing
- **dotenv**, **multer**

### Frontend
- **React + Vite**
- **Redux Toolkit**
- **TailwindCSS**
- **Framer Motion**
- **Axios**
- **React Router v6**

---

## 🧠 Core Features

| Role | Features |
|------|-----------|
| **Student** | Submit practicum logs, view feedback, track hours |
| **Mentor** | Review logs, verify and comment, approve/reject |
| **Tutor (Super Admin)** | Manage users, assign mentors, view overall reports |

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

🧑‍💻 Practicum Tracking System (PTS) – Local Deployment Guide

--------------------

The Practicum Tracking System (PTS) is a full-stack web application built with:

🧱 Node.js (Backend)

⚡ Prisma ORM

🗄️ MySQL (Relational Database)

🍃 MongoDB (Document Database)

🖥️ Vite + React (Frontend)

⚠️ Important: Both MySQL and MongoDB must be running locally before starting the backend.

-------------------------------
📌 1️⃣ Prerequisites

Before running the project, install the following:

✅ Node.js (LTS)

Download:
👉 https://nodejs.org/

Verify installation:

node -v
npm -v

✅ Git

Download:
👉 https://git-scm.com/

Verify:

git --version

✅ MySQL

Install MySQL Community Server.

During installation:

Username: root

Password: root
(Must match your .env)

MySQL runs on:

localhost:3306

✅ MongoDB

Install MongoDB Community Edition.

Default runs on:

mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017

---------------------------------------
📥 2️⃣ Clone the Repository

git clone <your-repository-url>

cd PTS

-------------------------------
🗄️ 3️⃣ Database Setup

PTS uses a hybrid database architecture:

Database	Purpose
MySQL	Users, Roles, Attendance, Evaluations
MongoDB	Log papers, file metadata, documents

🔵 MySQL Setup

Step 1 — Start MySQL Service (Windows)

Press:

Win + R → services.msc


Ensure MySQL80 is running.

Or start manually:

net start MySQL80

Step 2 — Create Database

Open MySQL CLI:

mysql -u root -p


Enter password:

root


Run:

CREATE DATABASE practicum;


Verify:

SHOW DATABASES;


You should see:

practicum

🟢 MongoDB Setup

Step 1 — Start MongoDB Service

Press:

Win + R → services.msc


Ensure MongoDB service is running.

Or start manually:

net start MongoDB

Step 2 — Verify MongoDB

Open terminal:

mongosh


Switch to project database:

use practicum


MongoDB creates the database automatically when first used.

---------------------------------
---------------------------------

🧱 4️⃣ Backend Setup (/be)

Step 1 — Navigate to Backend

cd be

Step 2 — Install Dependencies

npm install

Step 3 — Configure Environment Variables

Create a file named .env inside /be:

PORT=5000
JWT_SECRET=superSecret123

# MySQL
DATABASE_URL=mysql://root:root@localhost:3306/practicum

# MongoDB
MONGODB_URI=mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017/practicum

UPLOAD_PATH=uploads/logpapers

SUPERADMIN_EMAIL=admin@eit.ac.nz
SUPERADMIN_PASSWORD=Admin@123


⚠️ Ensure:

MySQL is running

MongoDB is running

practicum database exists in MySQL

----------------------------------------
⚙️ 5️⃣ Prisma Setup (MySQL)

Run:

npx prisma generate

npx prisma migrate dev --name init


This will:

Create all relational tables

Sync Prisma schema with MySQL

------------------------------------
👤 6️⃣ Seed Super Admin

Run:

npx prisma db seed


This creates the default admin account:

Email: admin@eit.ac.nz

Password: Admin@123

-----------------------------------------
📂 7️⃣ Create Upload Folder

Inside backend folder:

mkdir -p uploads/logpapers


Required for:

UPLOAD_PATH=uploads/logpapers

--------------------------------------------
▶️ 8️⃣ Run Backend

npm run dev


Backend runs at:

http://localhost:5000


You should see:

Server running on port 5000

------------------------------------------
🖥️ 9️⃣ Frontend Setup (/fe)

Open a new terminal.

Step 1 — Navigate to Frontend

cd fe

Step 2 — Install Dependencies

npm install

Step 3 — Configure Frontend Environment

Create .env inside /fe:

VITE_API_URL=http://localhost:5000

Step 4 — Run Frontend

npm run dev


Frontend runs at:

http://localhost:5173


Open in your browser.

🔐 Default Login

Email: admin@eit.ac.nz

Password: Admin@123


------------------------------------------------------------------
🧹 Git Hygiene

Do NOT push these files:

.env
node_modules/
uploads/
.db
.sql
.pem
.crt
.key


Ensure they are included in .gitignore.

------------------------------
---------------------------------
🚨 Common Issues & Fixes
❌ MySQL Connection Error

✔ Check MySQL is running
✔ Confirm username/password = root/root
✔ Confirm database = practicum

❌ MongoDB Not Connecting

✔ Ensure MongoDB service is running
✔ Check port 27017

❌ Prisma Migration Error

Reset database:

npx prisma migrate reset

❌ Port 5000 Already in Use

Find process:

lsof -i :5000


Kill process:

kill -9 <PID>


------------------------
-----------------------
✅ Final Checklist

 Node.js installed

 MySQL running

 MongoDB running

 practicum DB created in MySQL

 .env configured

 Prisma migration completed

 Super Admin seeded

 Upload folder created

 Backend running (localhost:5000)

 Frontend running (localhost:5173)

--------------------------------
Your PTS system should now be running locally 🎉

Commit message:

Enhance README with environment variables instructions
Added detailed instructions for environment variables setup and emphasized the importance of the .env file.

README.md, after:

# 🎓 EIT Practicum Tracking System

A full-stack web application designed to streamline practicum tracking, feedback management, and performance evaluation for students, mentors, and tutors at the Eastern Institute of Technology (EIT).

---

## 🧭 Overview

This system helps EIT’s School of Computing manage practicum activities for Mental Health & Addiction students.  
It allows students to log practicum hours, mentors to verify logs and provide feedback, and tutors to monitor overall student progress — all in one central dashboard.

---

## 🧩 Project Structure


EIT_Pratictum_Tracking_System/
├── backend/ # Node.js + Express + Prisma + MySQL + MongoDB
│ ├── prisma/ # Prisma schema & migrations
│ ├── src/
│ │ ├── routes/ # API endpoints
│ │ ├── controllers/ # Business logic
│ │ ├── middlewares/ # Auth, error handlers
│ │ └── server.js # Main Express entry point
│ └── package.json
│
├── frontend/ # React + Vite + Redux Toolkit + TailwindCSS
│ ├── src/
│ │ ├── api/ # Axios setup & interceptors
│ │ ├── components/ # Reusable UI components
│ │ ├── context/ # Auth context (Tutor / Mentor / Student)
│ │ ├── pages/ # All main pages
│ │ └── App.jsx # Root app
│ └── package.json
│
└── README.md


---

## ⚙️ Tech Stack

### Backend
- **Node.js + Express.js**
- **Prisma ORM** with **MySQL**
- **MongoDB** for log papers & feedback
- **JWT Authentication**
- **bcrypt** for password hashing
- **dotenv**, **multer**

### Frontend
- **React + Vite**
- **Redux Toolkit**
- **TailwindCSS**
- **Framer Motion**
- **Axios**
- **React Router v6**

---

## 🧠 Core Features

| Role | Features |
|------|-----------|
| **Student** | Submit practicum logs, view feedback, track hours |
| **Mentor** | Review logs, verify and comment, approve/reject |
| **Tutor (Super Admin)** | Manage users, assign mentors, view overall reports |

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

🧑‍💻 Practicum Tracking System (PTS) – Local Deployment Guide

--------------------

The Practicum Tracking System (PTS) is a full-stack web application built with:

🧱 Node.js (Backend)

⚡ Prisma ORM

🗄️ MySQL (Relational Database)

🍃 MongoDB (Document Database)

🖥️ Vite + React (Frontend)

⚠️ Important: Both MySQL and MongoDB must be running locally before starting the backend.

-------------------------------
📌 1️⃣ Prerequisites

Before running the project, install the following:

✅ Node.js (LTS)

Download:
👉 https://nodejs.org/

Verify installation:

node -v
npm -v

✅ Git

Download:
👉 https://git-scm.com/

Verify:

git --version

✅ MySQL

Install MySQL Community Server.

During installation:

Username: root

Password: root
(Must match your .env)

MySQL runs on:

localhost:3306

✅ MongoDB

Install MongoDB Community Edition.

Default runs on:

mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017

---------------------------------------
📥 2️⃣ Clone the Repository

git clone <your-repository-url>

cd PTS

-------------------------------
🗄️ 3️⃣ Database Setup

PTS uses a hybrid database architecture:

Database	Purpose
MySQL	Users, Roles, Attendance, Evaluations
MongoDB	Log papers, file metadata, documents

🔵 MySQL Setup

Step 1 — Start MySQL Service (Windows)

Press:

Win + R → services.msc


Ensure MySQL80 is running.

Or start manually:

net start MySQL80

Step 2 — Create Database

Open MySQL CLI:

mysql -u root -p


Enter password:

root


Run:

CREATE DATABASE practicum;


Verify:

SHOW DATABASES;


You should see:

practicum

🟢 MongoDB Setup

Step 1 — Start MongoDB Service

Press:

Win + R → services.msc


Ensure MongoDB service is running.

Or start manually:

net start MongoDB

Step 2 — Verify MongoDB

Open terminal:

mongosh


Switch to project database:

use practicum


MongoDB creates the database automatically when first used.

---------------------------------
---------------------------------

🧱 4️⃣ Backend Setup (/be)

Step 1 — Navigate to Backend

cd be

Step 2 — Install Dependencies

npm install

Step 3 — Configure Environment Variables

Create a file named .env inside /be:

------------------------------------
🔐 Environment Variables Setup

This project uses environment variables for configuration.

You must create a local .env file before running the backend.

📄 .env.example (Template File)

This file is a template

It shows which environment variables are required

It does NOT contain real credentials

It is safe to commit to GitHub

⚠️ Do NOT edit this file.

🔒 .env (Your Local Configuration)

You must create this file manually inside the backend folder.

Path:

PTS/be/.env


This file contains real credentials and must NOT be pushed to GitHub.

-----------------------------------------
⚠️ Ensure:

MySQL is running

MongoDB is running

practicum database exists in MySQL

----------------------------------------
⚙️ 5️⃣ Prisma Setup (MySQL)

Run:

npx prisma generate

npx prisma migrate dev --name init


This will:

Create all relational tables

Sync Prisma schema with MySQL

------------------------------------
👤 6️⃣ Seed Super Admin

Run:

npx prisma db seed


This creates the default admin account:

Email: admin@eit.ac.nz

Password: Admin@123

-----------------------------------------
📂 7️⃣ Create Upload Folder

Inside backend folder:

mkdir -p uploads/logpapers


Required for:

UPLOAD_PATH=uploads/logpapers

--------------------------------------------
▶️ 8️⃣ Run Backend

npm run dev


Backend runs at:

http://localhost:5000


You should see:

Server running on port 5000

------------------------------------------
🖥️ 9️⃣ Frontend Setup (/fe)

Open a new terminal.

Step 1 — Navigate to Frontend

cd fe

Step 2 — Install Dependencies

npm install

Step 3 — Configure Frontend Environment

Create .env inside /fe:

VITE_API_URL=http://localhost:5000

Step 4 — Run Frontend

npm run dev


Frontend runs at:

http://localhost:5173


Open in your browser.

🔐 Default Login

Email: admin@eit.ac.nz

Password: Admin@123


------------------------------------------------------------------
🧹 Git Hygiene

Do NOT push these files:

.env
node_modules/
uploads/
.db
.sql
.pem
.crt
.key


Ensure they are included in .gitignore.

------------------------------
---------------------------------
🚨 Common Issues & Fixes
❌ MySQL Connection Error

✔ Check MySQL is running
✔ Confirm username/password = root/root
✔ Confirm database = practicum

❌ MongoDB Not Connecting

✔ Ensure MongoDB service is running
✔ Check port 27017

❌ Prisma Migration Error

Reset database:

npx prisma migrate reset

❌ Port 5000 Already in Use

Find process:

lsof -i :5000


Kill process:

kill -9 <PID>


------------------------
-----------------------
✅ Final Checklist

 Node.js installed

 MySQL running

 MongoDB running

 practicum DB created in MySQL

 .env configured

 Prisma migration completed

 Super Admin seeded

 Upload folder created

 Backend running (localhost:5000)

 Frontend running (localhost:5173)

--------------------------------
Your PTS system should now be running locally 🎉
